So, I want you to picture this.
You've studied for weeks.
Oh yeah.
You know the material backward and forward,
you completely nailed the practice test, right?
But the second you sit down in that quiet room,
the fluorescent lights are buzzing,
you flip the exam paper over,
and you just completely freeze.
Like your mind goes entirely blank.
Completely blank, why does that happen?
Well, if you ask a psychologist,
they're gonna tell you one thing.
But if you ask a neurobiologist,
they will give you a completely different answer.
And, you know, the neither of them is wrong.
Right.
So today, we're doing a deep dive
into the dynamic relationship
between neuroscience and psychology.
We're unpacking how these two fields
don't actually compete.
Our mission today is to show how they come together
to fully explain like the entire human experience.
Yeah, because freezing up on a test
is this universally frustrating human experience.
And it perfectly illustrates
this massive misconception that people have.
Okay, let's unpack this.
What misconception?
Well, people tend to think that psychology
and neuroscience are sort of fighting
to be the right way to view human behavior.
Like it has to be one or the other.
But they're not.
No, not at all.
They're actually looking at the exact same event
and the exact same student.
But they're just asking fundamentally different questions
to gather entirely different data.
Right, because to the untrained eye,
a freeze is just a freeze.
But if we view this behavior
through the psychological lens,
we are really looking at meaning and context.
Exactly, the psychology lens focuses on the mind.
Right, a psychologist is looking at that student at the desk
and asking about their internal and external reality.
Like what did that person perceive in that moment?
What did they expect was gonna happen?
Yeah, they're examining the thoughts,
the emotions, maybe the ingrained habits
that shape that freezing behavior.
Like is there some deep-seated fear or failure?
Or maybe the specific phrasing of that very first question
triggered a memory of a past academic disaster or something?
Precisely.
The psychological lens is deeply concerned
with the subjective experience.
It's looking at the threat appraisal happening
in that student's mind.
But then you swap lenses, right?
You look through the neuroscience lens
and the focus shifts entirely to the physical mechanisms
like operating inside the actual nervous system.
Yeah, the physical hardware.
Yeah.
The scientists isn't asking about the student's fear
of failure or their past trauma.
They don't care about the bad test and third grade.
Right, they are asking which specific brain circuits,
which stress hormones, which autonomic responses were firing,
what exact neurotransmitters were active,
the literal millisecond that student froze.
And what's fascinating here is that this is where that
misconception usually crops up, right?
People often think, well, one of these explanations
has to be the real root cause.
Yes, but neither level replaces the other.
That is so critical to understand.
Psychology describes the mind and behavior.
It's what a person does,
what they feel, think, learn and report.
While neuroscience is just explaining
the biological implementation of those things.
Exactly.
Both explanations for our frozen student
are 100% true at the exact same time.
Okay, let me try an analogy here.
I like to think of this like a computer.
Okay, I like what this is going.
So psychology is sort of like analyzing
a software program's user interface, right?
You're looking at the menus, the butters,
what the user actually experiences on the screen.
Yeah, output in the interaction, yeah.
But neuroscience is like opening up the computer case
and looking at the hardware.
You're measuring the electrical currents on the motherboard,
the physical memory chips, the fan speed.
That is a perfect way to look at it.
You have a software experience
and the physical hardware mechanism.
Oh, wait, let me push back on that for a second.
Because if our neuroscience tools get so incredibly advanced
that we can eventually map out the physical hardware
perfectly, like down the every single
atom and electrical current,
do we even need to study the software anymore?
Right.
If we know the hardware, why bother with the psychology?
Yeah, why talk about abstract feelings
if I can just mathematically measure your exact dopamine
and cortisol levels?
It's a really common debate.
But abandoning the psychological context
is a total dead end.
Why?
Because knowing the physical hardware
doesn't tell you anything about the intent of the system.
Yeah.
Even if you map every single electrical impulse,
each lens is answering a completely different kind of question.
Oh, I see.
You absolutely need the psychological context
to understand why that biological mechanism matters
in the real world, like what actually triggered
those electrical currents in the first place?
So to really grasp how deeply these lenses rely on each other,
we have to look at the scale of human behavior.
Because a single action like our student freezing
is actually the result of processes happening
across a mass spectrum.
Right, the levels of analysis.
Exactly.
At the very foundation, you have this microscopic level.
We're talking molecules.
This is where neurotransmitters and hormones operate.
And then as you zoom out, you hit the cellular level.
So now you're looking at networks of individual neurons
or glia cells.
Right, zoom out again.
And you're looking at entire brain circuits
communicating with each other.
Further still, you're observing the whole brain.
And then the individual's outward behavior, right?
Yes.
And eventually, you zoom all the way out
to see how that specific behavior interacts
with an impact broader society.
Wow.
So if you look at the diagram on this slide
from our source nodes, visually, you
can see how researchers try to map this out.
They try to link the brain activity
at those lower levels to the complex behaviors
at the higher levels.
It is a massive puzzle of causality.
Yeah, and visually mapping the link
between the brain and behavior is wild.
If you look at model A in the nodes,
it shows that a subset of neural activity patterns
in our brain is linked to all natural behaviors.
That makes sense.
It does.
It's the baseline assumption.
But then you look at models B and C.
And visually, you can see that sometimes
a really small subset of activity patterns
links to a specific small subset of behaviors.
Right.
But crucially, not all brain activity
results in a behavioral output.
Wait, really?
So my brain is doing things that don't
results in any action.
Oh, constantly.
Your brain is doing an enormous amount
of background processing that never translates
into any behavior at all.
It's like going back to your analogy,
a computer running a huge background update
while you're just reading a web page.
The neural activity is furious,
but your hands aren't moving any differently.
That is so wild to think about.
But then visually, models D and E show something
even more confusing.
It's the many to one problem.
You can have multiple completely different neural patterns
underlying just one single behavior.
Yes.
The exact same physical movement
can be driven by entirely different circuits.
Right.
Like throwing your hands up in the air.
You could be doing that because you're
cheering for your favorite team.
Or you could be defensively bracing
because something is falling on you.
To the naked eye, the behavior is identical.
But the neural patterns are totally different.
And you know, the brain does the exact reverse, too.
No one did any problem.
Exactly.
One single neural firing pattern
might be involved in multiple wildly different behaviors.
Like a specific circuit involving the amygdala
might be recruited when you are terrified of a snake.
But that same underlying circuitry
might also be heavily engaged
when you were intensely excited,
like riding a massive roller coaster.
Oh, wow.
So the context completely changes the output.
But that raises a huge question.
If one behavior can have multiple different neural patterns
behind it and one neural pattern
can drive multiple behaviors, how do researchers ever figure
out what's causing what?
Honestly, that is the defining struggle
of the entire field, untangling that web
requires highly sophisticated data gathering
from both the psychological side and the neurobiological side.
And we really have to understand
Let's break down that data gathering.
Because I think we need to clear up
how empirical psychology actually is.
Psychology doesn't just talk about feelings.
It turns the messy, subjective human experience
into hard, quantifiable data.
Oh, absolutely.
They aren't just observing behavior and guessing.
They are putting actual numbers to it.
Right.
Through highly controlled tasks,
psychologists measure reaction times down to the millisecond.
They track accuracy rates, analyze specific choices,
and map out the exact errors someone makes under pressure.
And they also use very validated self-reporting structures.
Patients systematically categorize their thoughts,
their symptoms, their beliefs.
It's a rigorous quantification of the mind.
Meanwhile, neuroscience is trying
to turn the physical nervous system into data, right?
Yes.
They use functional measurements, advanced imaging,
animal research, and pharmacology.
But every single one of those neuroscience
cools comes with a heavy trade-off, doesn't it?
It really is a constant balancing act.
Researchers basically have to navigate four main constraints.
You have spatial detail, which is where it happens.
OK.
Timing, which is when it happens, invasiveness,
how much you have to disrupt the body and causal power.
Causal power just meaning proving
that manipulating circuit x directly causes behavior y.
Exactly.
Proving true cause and effect.
So take functional MRI, or FMRI, for example.
It provides breathtaking spatial detail.
You can see exactly where activity is happening deep inside
the brain down to the millimeter.
But its timing is inherently flawed, right?
Yes.
Because FMRI doesn't measure electricity directly,
it measures blood flow.
Right.
The blood oxygen level of dependent signal.
And blood takes a few seconds
to rush into an active brain region.
Exactly.
Neurofiring happens in milliseconds.
But the blood flow takes seconds.
So by the time the FMRI registers the activity,
the actual thought or impulse is already passed.
It's like seeing the smoke, but missing the actual explosion.
You know where it happened, but you completely
missed the exact millisecond the spark ignited.
That's a great way to put it.
Now if you want that millisecond precision,
you use something like an EEG, measuring
the electrical signals right on the scalp.
But then you lose the spatial detail, right?
Yes.
You know exactly when it happened.
But you can't tell exactly where deep inside the brain
tissue, the signal originated from.
And then there's the hurdle of causal power.
Because if you want high causal power,
you have to physically intervene.
You have to turn circuits on and off.
Which is obviously highly invasive.
You can't just open up a human volunteer's skull
and start temporarily disabling brain regions
with pharmacology.
Right.
Which is exactly why animal models are so crucial
for causal research, while non-invasive imaging
is what we have to rely on for humans.
And actually visually representing
what those non-invasive scans capture
is just incredible.
GIF showing dynamic neural activity
with interconnected regions and network fibers.
OK, visually the animation is showing
these glowing network fibers firing
and rapid succession across totally different regions
of the brain, like all simultaneously.
It's mesmerizing.
It really is.
What strikes you is the sheer speed
and the interconnectedness of it all.
It visually proves that the brain is this continuous,
wildly dynamic web.
Yeah, completely shatters that old myth
that the brain works in isolated buckets.
Right, like the idea that vision happens
in one quiet little corner and emotion
happens in a completely separate, disconnected room.
That's just not true.
Not at all.
It is a relentless rapid fire symphony.
Everything is talking to everything else all the time.
And building on that dynamic GIF we just saw,
we really have to factor in neural variability.
What do you mean my variability?
Well, just as humans express behaviors differently
on the outside, we have massive structural
and functional variability in our physical neural makeup
on the inside.
Wait, meaning my brain's physical wiring
literally looks different than yours.
Unquestionably, that variability exists
between different individuals,
between different groups of people.
And this is the crazy part,
even within the exact same person over time.
So my brain is physically different today
than it was yesterday.
Yes, the physical neural pathways
in your brain today are structurally different
than they were five years ago.
Your experiences, your learning, your environment,
they have literally rewired the physical connections.
Okay, here's where it gets really interesting.
When you take everything we've just discussed,
the psychological meaning, the neurobiological mechanisms,
the data trade-offs, the physical rewiring over time,
and you apply it to major human struggles,
it totally changes how we approach things.
It changes everything about treatment and understanding.
Yeah.
Let's look at fear and severe anxiety as an example.
Fear is a brilliant example
of why both lenses are mandatory.
Through the psychology lens,
we evaluate threat appraisal.
Like how is this person mentally evaluating
the danger in their environment?
Exactly.
We look at their history of avoidance learning.
How have they been conditioned over time
to avoid specific triggers?
What are their cognitive expectations?
But if we switch to the neuroscience lens,
we're looking at the specific biological threat circuits.
We are measuring the autonomic nervous system
going into overdrive.
Right, the heart rate spikes.
The immediate activation of the amygdala
before the conscious brain even realizes what's happening.
And to treat a severe phobia, you absolutely need both.
I mean, you can give someone a medication
like a beta blocker to stop their heart from racing.
But if their psychological threat appraisal
is still screaming that they are in mortal danger,
the phobia is still there.
That's spot on.
Let's apply it to another really complex issue.
Addiction and reward.
Take a single action, right?
Like a person reaching for a cigarette.
Psychology might view that reach
as a deeply ingrained habit
or maybe a lapse in decision-making.
It focuses on concepts like reinforcement learning.
The subjective feeling of craving.
Yes, that agonizing craving.
And the internal psychological battle
for self-control against long-term goals.
But neuroscience views the exact same reach
for a cigarette as a circuit level adaptation.
It's looking at the immediate reward pathways.
Exactly, it's tracking this specific dopamine signaling
that creates a prediction error in the brain.
That dopamine floods the system
and structurally hijacks the prefrontal cortex's ability
to exert top-down control.
Wow, so you literally can't separate the biology
from the experience, which is why modern research
doesn't silo these fields anymore.
No, they don't.
Disciplines like cognitive neuroscience
intentionally fuse these lenses together.
And there is a really powerful applied model
for this overlap in our notes.
Chronic stress and its effect on learning.
Oh, this is a profound one.
Yeah, let's go back to our student.
But this time, it's a student whose grades
are slowly slipping over a whole semester.
The psychology side, the context, provides the why.
Right.
Perhaps there is intense financial pressure at home.
Or a heavy family caretaking demands.
That environment creates a persistent, subjective mental
state of worry and pressure.
And then the neuroscience side provides the how.
It explains how that persistent psychological worry
physically translates into sustained releases
of stress hormones, like cortisol.
Right, and over time, that chronic biological stress
structurally impairs the brain's learning circuits.
Sustained cortisol exposure can literally inhibit
long-term potentiation in the hippocampus.
Long-term potentiation, that's the strengthening
of synapses needed to form memories, right?
Exactly.
So the stress chemically prevents
the strengthening of those synapses.
Yeah.
The psychological worry physically damages
the hardware's ability to learn.
OK, but if that's true, then we're back
in that obvious trap again.
How so?
Well, if we know the exact chemical mechanism
like if we know that cortisol is blocking long-term
potentiation in the hippocampus, why do we even
care about the family dynamics causing the stress?
I see.
Why not just give that student a pharmacological intervention
that blocks the cortisol receptors
and completely ignore the messy psychological environment?
Because if we connect this to the bigger picture,
the environment is continuously programming the biology.
You cannot separate the brain from the world it exists in.
Right.
But you can give that student a pill
to artificially block their biological stress response today.
But if they go right back into a home
with severe financial pressure tomorrow,
their psychological threat appraisal
will still recognize the danger.
The software still knows there's a problem.
Exactly.
And the brain will continuously try to adapt.
It might override the medication, increase
receptor density, or find a completely different biological
pathway to signal that stress.
Because the hardware is always reacting
to the software's interpretation of the world.
Yes, if you only treat the hardware
and completely ignore the environmental context
that is programming the software,
the system will just keep crashing.
The biological intervention might buy you some time, sure.
But the psychological reality will eventually
So what does this all mean for us?
For you, listening right now, going about your daily life.
It really brings us to the ultimate takeaway
from these two fields.
Psychology gives our behavior meaning.
And neuroscience gives our behavior mechanism.
Yes, together and only together.
They explain the mind, the brain, our behavior,
and our environment as one single beautifully connected
constantly adapting system.
It's a total paradigm shift for how you view your own life.
The next time you find yourself freezing up under pressure
or maybe defaulting to a bad habit
or just feeling overwhelmed by stress,
you don't have to just sit there and frustration.
No, but you can step back.
You can analyze your own hardware and your own software.
You can ask what your biology is doing,
what your environment is telling it to do.
It does leave us with one very provocative thought, though,
from everything we just talked about.
What's that?
Well, if our physical neural makeup is highly variable
and it is constantly physically rewiring itself over time
based on our experiences and our psychological context,
like our moods, our environment, our beliefs is always shifting.
Is any behavior you do today truly the exact same behavior
you did yesterday?
Oh, wow, that is a deep question.
Right, if your physical hardware changed overnight
through neuroplasticity and your psychological software
updated this morning based on new context,
are you ever really repeating an action?
Or is every single thing you do, a brand new event generated
by a brain that has literally never existed
in this exact state before?
That is a fascinating mystery to sit with.
So for the next behavior, you observe in yourself
for our friend today, whether it's freezing on a test,
reaching for a cup of coffee or just laughing at a joke.
Ask yourself, what would the psychological lens show you?
And what secret mechanisms is the neuroscience lens
hiding just beneath the surface?